A time series is a sequence where a metric is recorded over regular time intervals.
Depending on the frequency, a time series can be of yearly (ex: annual budget), quarterly (ex: expenses), monthly (ex: air traffic), weekly (ex: sales qty), daily (ex: weather), hourly (ex: stocks price), minutes (ex: inbound calls in a call canter) and even seconds wise (ex: web traffic).
We have already seen the steps involved in a previous post on Time Series Analysis. If you haven’t read it, I highly encourage you to do so.
Forecasting is the next step where you want to predict the future values the series is going to take.

But why forecast?
Because, forecasting a time series (like demand and sales) is often of tremendous commercial value.
In most manufacturing companies, it drives the fundamental business planning, procurement and production activities. Any errors in the forecasts will ripple down throughout the supply chain or any business context for that matter. So it’s important to get the forecasts accurate in order to save on costs and is critical to success.
Not just in manufacturing, the techniques and concepts behind time series forecasting are applicable in any business.

Now forecasting a time series can be broadly divided into two types.
If you use only the previous values of the time series to predict its future values, it is called Univariate Time Series Forecasting.
And if you use predictors other than the series (a.k.a exogenous variables) to forecast it is called Multi Variate Time Series Forecasting.

A pure Auto Regressive (AR only) model is one where Yt depends only on its own lags. That is, Yt is a function of the ‘lags of Yt’.
Likewise a pure Moving Average (MA only) model is one where Yt depends only on the lagged forecast errors.
An ARIMA model is one where the time series was differenced at least once to make it stationary and you combine the AR and the MA terms.

ARIMA model in words:
Predicted Yt = Constant + Linear combination Lags of Y (upto p lags) + Linear Combination of Lagged forecast errors (upto q lags)

ARIMA, short for ‘Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average’ is actually a class of models that ‘explains’ a given time series based on its own past values, that is, its own lags and the lagged forecast errors, so that equation can be used to forecast future values.
Any ‘non-seasonal’ time series that exhibits patterns and is not a random white noise can be modeled with ARIMA models.
An ARIMA model is characterized by 3 terms: p, d, q
where,
p is the order of the AR term
q is the order of the MA term
d is the number of differencing required to make the time series stationary

If a time series, has seasonal patterns, then you need to add seasonal terms and it becomes SARIMA, short for ‘Seasonal ARIMA’. More on that once we finish ARIMA.
